desultoryquest
11:59 PM
Hi I’ve interacted with you on the marfans subreddit. I have an option to go for PEARS in April. My aorta root is at 4.3cm now. Wanted to check with you about the recovery? How are you doing now? How long did it take to get back to work? How long did you need a bystander to help? You had mentioned about the initial few days in the comments
4 replies
Feb 17, 2025
User Avatar
CCWhistle
4:26 PM
Hey - I only now saw this. So sorry for the delay.

My surgery was October 28. I've been 99% recovered for at least a few weeks now.

The first 48 hours were the worst of it. As soon as the drainage tubes came out I felt much better. Even those first 48 were really nothing compared to other situations I've been through - kidney stones, back spasms - these were much worse. I didn't have much pain after PEARS - the first 48 hours was more weakness and discomfort and difficulty breathing (which I blame on the drainage tubes).

I was cooking some meals for myself after two weeks but because of the tiredness I was happy to let my wife take care of the meals for a solid month.

Aside from cooking I didn't really need any help at home. Because of the sternotomy you're not supposed to raise your arms over your head or lift anything over 2 pounds for several months so that's something you might need help with.

I was scared for a while that I was not going to fully recover. I was tired all the time and having fast heart rate and palpitations. But I made it.

I could have gone back to work after two months, but I got laid off so that wasn't an issue. : /
Read more
I would not hesitate to get PEARS again. I wish you all the best in your journey!
User Avatar
desultoryquest
7:30 PM
Thanks a lot for replying! Nice to know that you’re doing well. What’s the remaining 1% that you’re waiting for?

Did you have to do anything to manage the fast heart rate and palpitations? I did see that some people can get Afib post surgery.

How about coughing and sneezing? I read that you’ve got to use a pillow for support. I’m a bit nervous about that because I have a tendency to sneeze easily
Read more
Feb 20, 2025
User Avatar
CCWhistle
2:59 PM
The 1% is pretty much the sternum. I think it could take up to a year before it's done done. For the first two months it would pop when I put my socks on and that was rather disconcerting. But it finally stopped. I just feel a little irritation when I overwork my chest carrying things and whatnot.

I didn't take anything for the heart rate and it's returned to more or less normal on its own. I still feel some palpitations in certain positions but it's not so bad.

You will absolutely want to learn how to stop a sneeze because that shit is indeed painful, pillow or not. I bought a support vest which helped, but it was a hundred bucks and I only used it for a week or two. I'll look for the link.

Also did some breathing exercises from YouTube to cut down on coughing. Will see about finding that as well.