PEARS Patient Story: CCWhistle
URL: Reddit
Brief Description: Recovered well after PEARS, sternum popping first two months, sneezing painful, learned breathing exercises from YouTube.

My surgery was October 28. I've been 99% recovered for at least a few weeks now.

The first 48 hours were the worst of it. As soon as the drainage tubes came out I felt much better. Even those first 48 were really nothing compared to other situations I've been through - kidney stones, back spasms - these were much worse. I didn't have much pain after PEARS - the first 48 hours was more weakness and discomfort and difficulty breathing (which I blame on the drainage tubes).

I was cooking some meals for myself after two weeks but because of the tiredness I was happy to let my wife take care of the meals for a solid month.

Aside from cooking I didn't really need any help at home. Because of the sternotomy you're not supposed to raise your arms over your head or lift anything over 2 pounds for several months so that's something you might need help with.

I was scared for a while that I was not going to fully recover. I was tired all the time and having fast heart rate and palpitations. But I made it.

I could have gone back to work after two months, but I got laid off so that wasn't an issue. : /
I would not hesitate to get PEARS again. I wish you all the best in your journey!

The 1% is pretty much the sternum. I think it could take up to a year before it's done done. For the first two months it would pop when I put my socks on and that was rather disconcerting. But it finally stopped. I just feel a little irritation when I overwork my chest carrying things and whatnot.

I didn't take anything for the heart rate and it's returned to more or less normal on its own. I still feel some palpitations in certain positions but it's not so bad.

You will absolutely want to learn how to stop a sneeze because that shit is indeed painful, pillow or not. I bought a support vest which helped, but it was a hundred bucks and I only used it for a week or two. I'll look for the link.

Also did some breathing exercises from YouTube to cut down on coughing. Will see about finding that as well.
