PEARS Patient Story: Reddit Unnamed User
URL: Reddit
Brief Description: PEARS procedure, woke up with breathing tube gone, no pain but manual breathing difficulty, BP spike day 3, rehab after 3 weeks.

Hm. I had PEARS procedure so my experience is a bit different. But for what it's worth...

I was surprised by the lack of pain. Coughing really sucked, but luckily I wasn't doing much of that. Followed some YouTube videos for post-surgery breathing exercises.

I was in the hospital for a week. When I got back I was going upstairs to shower within a couple days. They wanted to send me to rehab after a week but I put it off and didn't start until 2 weeks after surgery.

Spent those two weeks sleeping a lot. I was pretty paranoid about blood clots so I tried to get up and shuffle around as much as possible. Was able to start cooking some meals for myself in that 2nd week.

First week of rehab was a bit challenging. Just getting there with public transportation was pretty tiring. I didn't want to go at all, but it turned out to be very helpful. Without rehab I probably would have kept sleeping all day. I think it very much helped me to restore some energy. Did 3 weeks altogether.

I'm 2 months past surgery and most of the time now I feel quite normal. The recovery to get here was really interesting though. Sometimes I felt like I was making great strides within a single day, but I also often got frustrated with feeling low energy, with my heart in tachycardia, etc, and worried I would never be my old self again.

Be patient and kind to yourself, but also push yourself a bit. It's important to move.

Good luck!

I woke up with the breathing tube already gone and spent a day in the ICU pretty groggy, no pain.

The day after the procedure they moved me back to the normal station and had me stand up. I was worried about how much this would hurt but I think I still had some anesthetic effect going and wasn't so bad at all.

The only pain killers I got was Novalgin (not available in the US) which is basically a step up from ibuprofen.

Bridge of second/third day I had a rough moment. I could only take short shallow breaths and while conscious it was a lot of manual breathing. The nurse completely blew me off and I was kinda freaking out.

Despite that, I was able to get up and walk a bit.

I believe it was also the third day that the anesthesia really left my system and my blood pressure started to spike over 160/90 so I panicked about that as well. I took a couple doses of BP meds and it went back tod normal and stayed there. My heart rate was still in 99s however.

Day 4 they took out the catheter and the drainage tubes and it was night and day. I could suddenly breathe much better and felt human again. Was by now taking many laps around the station. Hour by hour I felt big improvements.

Day five I felt like I could have gone home, but I was told ahead of time it'd be at least 7 days. My attention had turned from my physical condition to being annoyed by hospital food and noise and such things.

I left one week after the surgery. I was stiff and slow but ok. I was very happy to finally shower when I got home.

Second week post-op I slept quite a lot. I did my best to take some walks and to ride my ergo bike at a leisurely pace for like 20-25 minutes.

Third week I started rehab 5x/wk. Good to be forced out of the house, but sometimes it's a bit much. All this time my heart rate has still not dropped below like 87.

This last weekend was really good. I went out to a social dinner and was feeling super. I was really encouraged about my progress overall.

Yesterday was a big setback for me. Before I even started on the ergometer my HR was 105 and then I stupidly pushed too hard and for the rest of the day simply laying on the sofa my HR was 98.

Overall, I would not hesitate to go with PEARS again. I'm very certain I would have faced the same challenges+ worse with any other procedure.
